=head1 A C++ Framework for QNX Virtual Filesystems

=head2 Introduction

In the process of writing QNX resource managers it becomes
clear that a substantial amount of the code, especially for
virtual filesystems, is very generic and reusable. This
has been recognized by QSSL, and their newest version
of QNX, renamed Neutrino, has incorporated a shared library to
handle this generic functionality. This is supposed to
substantially reduce the cut-and-paste coding in writing
a resource manager, as well as contribute to Neutrinos
small memory footprint.

However, I'm not using Neutrino.

Since the effort involved
in implementing a virtual filesystem is considerable,
I think it has remained a moderately arcane area. It was also
getting in the way of me moving past the QNX mechanics and
getting to what I really wanted to do: write an ftp or html
filesystem. So, as a first step, I wrote a prototype of
a virtual filesystem framework in C++, and implemented a
RAM filesystem in the process since it seemed a good test
case.

I've only recently discovered that QSSL has
published a much better example of writing a virtual filesystem than
they used to have, and that the example comes in the form
of a framework, see iomanager2 (I<ftp://ftp.qnx.com/usr/free/qnx4/os/samples/misc/iomanager2.tgz>).
My framework is surprisingly similar, but does some things
theirs doesn't. I've read theirs and merged some of the
useful ideas into mine.

As a next step I decided to tackle a Tar filesystem,
a resoure manager that would give a (read-only)
filesystem-like interface to a tar file, one that you can
cd into, then view a file with less or vi, etc. This is now
done, and I'm currently working on getting support for
compressed tar files.

My next goal was going to be an ftp filesystem, based on the ftp
support that already exists in the socket++ (I<http://toronto.qenesis.com/Sam/socket++.html>)
library. However, that requires changes to the ftp support in
socket++ to make it more useable, so I implemented a pop3 filesystem
instead.  It presents a pop3 e-mail account as a virtual filesystem,
allowing you to read your pop3 mail with your favorite text
editor. Compilation requires my version of socket++1.10 since
it uses a pop3 protocol class I implemented using the socket++
framework.

Before I go back to the ftp filesystem I want a multi-threaded
pop mail download so io messages that can be satisfied
without blocking don't have to wait for the current download to
complete. This is now done. I also want multi-threaded reads
of gzip and freeze compressed tar files.

=head2 The caveats...

This is my code, I wrote it for free, I did it because
I thought it was pretty interesting, and you can use it freely
(under the terms of the GPL). It is not, however,
production code. It works well enough to play with, and if you
find it useful I'd be very pleased. If anybody has any
comments, questions, encounters any problems, etc., please
feel free to contact me (I<mailto:sam@cogent.ca>), I'd like to
help.

Here's some of the problems that I'm aware of:

=over 4

=item *

Its pretty likely that there are some QNX messages that I'm not dealing with
correctly, if anybody sees anything strange I'd like to hear
about it.

=item *

The framework makes I<absolutely no> attempt
to do the uid/gid permissions checking that any production 
manager should. It'll be easy to do, I just haven't yet since I haven't
needed to.

=item *

While all the messages needed for directory navigation and editing
of a file are supported, as well as creating files/directories/symbolic
links, there are still missing messages. You can't, for example, execute
a file from the virtual filesystem (currently).

=item *

Tar file formats are a standard that isn't, and I'd be interested in
hearing if anybody finds a tar file that the tar archive class can't
deal with. Its also not clear what to do with absolute paths in
tar archives, particularly when mixed with relative paths, and in archived
symbolic links. See the usage message for vf_tar for details.

=item *

While I tried to respond to messages as efficiently as possible, in other
areas I don't try to be efficient at all. I use the Watcom String
class for a few things, and the RAM filesystem uses malloc() and realloc()
pretty freely to allocate space for new files. I traded off speed for
flexibility when necessary.

=item *

On the other hand, one
thing I did I<not> do is attempt to hide how QNX or resource
managers work by using C++ to obfuscate away from the system. I think
the resulting code is fairly clear to somebody who knows how resource
managers work, but I wrote it, your mileage will vary.

=item *

There's a few install notes, and the executables all have usage
messages, but that's about the extent of the documentation. That's
probably going to remain the extent as well, unless there's some
kind of public outcry, I'm not holding by breath...

=back

=head2 ...and the code

You can grab just the binaries if you want, or else get the whole
package and compile it yourself. Be warned that resource managers
have to run as root or setuid root.

=over 4

=item *

You'll need socket++ (I<http://toronto.qenesis.com/Sam/socket++-1.10.1.tgz>) to
compile the pop3 filesystem.

=item *

Source for all the virtual filesystems (I<http://toronto.qenesis.com/Sam/vf-1.0.tgz>)

=item *

Binaries: Remember, these I<must> be run as root (or set-uid root) so you
may wish to download and look over the source yourself.

=over 8

=item *

vf_ram (I<http://toronto.qenesis.com/Sam/vf_ram.gz>) and
its
usage (I<http://toronto.qenesis.com/Sam/vf_ram.usage>)

=item *

vf_tar (I<http://toronto.qenesis.com/Sam/vf_tar.gz>)

=item *

vf_pop (I<http://toronto.qenesis.com/Sam/vf_pop.gz>)

=back

=back

This code is distributed under the GNU General Public Licence. I was going
to distribute it under the library licence, but I can't find a copy on my
machine. If the GPL's a problem for anybody, contact me, I could put it
under the library licence.

=head1 Some background and some links

For the last few years I've worked primarily with
QNX4 (I<http://www.qnx.com>). One of the most
interesting things about QNX is the ability to write
a resource manager capable of taking over a prefix in
the pathname space (such as "/dev") and responding
to the file oriented Unix system calls, such as
open(), read(), write(), readdir(), stat(), chdir(),
etc. In QNX, all API's that operate on a path, or
on the file descriptor returned by opening a path, are
implemented using resource managers. Mostly these
resource managers are used to implement mountable file systems,
or fairly generic Unix block and character-oriented
device drivers in "/dev/". Exceptions are the message
queue server, which offers the POSIX.4 "mq_*" API as well
as a filesystem interface, and the QNX print spoolers,
which offer a filesystem interface under the (virtual)
"/dev/spool" directory as well as the more traditional "lp*"
commands.

An interesting possibility is to write resource managers
that allow an interface to other, less traditional, 
functionality.

One example of this is a resource manager
that behaves as a single file, but where the contents are
different each time the file is read, dynamically chosen
from an index file. An implementation of this for QNX
is available from Astra (I<ftp://ftp.astra.mb.ca/pub/QuoteSrv>),
binary only. Its a handy way of having
a F<.signature> that changes each time it is read.

Another, less playful, example is the networking
API in the RoadRunner (I<http://www.cornfed.com/roadrunner>)
operating system. In this OS, opening a tcp connection
is accomplished by doing an open on a path such as
"/net/tcp/192.168.3.9/80", which would open a connection to
port 80 on the specified server. I can't link directly to the
pertinent page, so follow Documentation>>html>>Tcp File System.

The power of this is in the simplification of
APIs, and the unification of diverse interfaces, already a strength
of the Unix I/O architecture in which as many system resources
as possible are presented as "files". When an open() can be called
on any resource, you don't have to code your application to deal
specifically with those kinds of resources. For instance, you could
write a framegrabber driver where every time you read it you read
the current bitmap. Then you could write another manager that
every time it was read it read the current bitmap, and converted it
to a gif on the fly. Instant image capture on your web page, if you have
an inline link to that pseudo file.

The point isn't so much that open() and read() are intrinsically
easier to use than a custom API, such as frame_read(),
frame_to_gif(), etc., as that applications don't have to know about
your cutom API to use the resource; what's the chance that Apache
will have that frame grabber API built in? Or that vmail will, when you
try to send the current image as an attached gif?

Another interesting OS is the FSF's HURD
(I<http://www.gnu.org/software/hurd>), which is
advertised to use the underlying Mach OS's message passing to 
implement resource managers for things such as a virtual
filesystem for easy access to ftp servers. I'm still waiting
for the promised Debian GNU/HURD to see how well it works, but
I'm getting impatient...

=head1 The footer.

Back to the top (I<http://toronto.qenesis.com/Sam/index.html>).

